docs: write "getting started" (#415)
algolia/autocomplete.js: packages/website/docs/getting-started.md

title: Getting Started
---

> Check out the different ways to learn how to use Autocomplete, including following a basic implementation.

Author: Much better, I was struggling with a good intro.

  - Follow the [**Guides**](using-query-suggestions-plugin) to understand how to build common UX patterns.
  - Refer to [**API reference**](api) for a comprehensive list of parameters and options.
  - Try out the [**Playground**](https://codesandbox.io/s/github/algolia/autocomplete.js/tree/next/examples/js?file=/app.ts) where you can fork a basic implementation and play around.

Keep reading to see how to install Autocomplete and build a basic implementation with Algolia.

## Installation

The recommended way to get started is with the [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) package. It includes everything you need to render a JavaScript autocomplete experience.

Otherwise, you can install the [`autocomplete-core`](createAutocomplete) package if you want to [build a renderer](creating-a-renderer) from scratch.

All Autocomplete packages are available on the [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) registry.

```bash
yarn add @algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha
# or
npm install @algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha
```

If you don't want to use a package manager, you can use a standalone endpoint:

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha"></script>
```

> We recommend using jsDeliver but [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) is also available through [unpkg](https://unpkg.com/@algolia/autocomplete-js@1.0.0-alpha.39).

Reviewer: So that we don't deal with versioning for now:

```suggestion
We recommend using jsDeliver but [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) is also available through [unpkg](https://unpkg.com/@algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha).
```

  - Refer to [**API reference**](api) for a comprehensive list of parameters and options.
  - Try out the [**Playground**](https://codesandbox.io/s/github/algolia/autocomplete.js/tree/next/examples/js?file=/app.ts) where you can fork a basic implementation and play around.

Keep reading to see how to install Autocomplete and build a basic implementation with Algolia.

## Installation

The recommended way to get started is with the [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) package. It includes everything you need to render a JavaScript autocomplete experience.

Otherwise, you can install the [`autocomplete-core`](createAutocomplete) package if you want to [build a renderer](creating-a-renderer) from scratch.

All Autocomplete packages are available on the [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) registry.

```bash
yarn add @algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha
# or
npm install @algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha
```

If you don't want to use a package manager, you can use a standalone endpoint:

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha"></script>
```

We recommend using jsDeliver but [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) is also available at:

> - [CDNJS](https://cdnjs.com/libraries/autocomplete.js)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

`@algolia/autocomplete-js` doesn't seem to be available on that CDN.

Author: Are the ones listed on https://cdnjs.com/libraries/autocomplete.js not it?

Reviewer: No, the package is `@algolia/autocomplete-js`.

Author: Ah ok, I noticed they link the autocomplete.js GH, so assumed they were related.

Author: https://github.com/algolia/autocomplete.js/pull/415/commits/b9a80e5578045cbcc6c04e6b709e3f04e59f112b

> - [unpkg](https://unpkg.com/browse/autocomplete@0.0.1/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [unpkg](https://unpkg.com/@algolia/autocomplete-js@1.0.0-alpha.39)
```

> <script src="https://unpkg.com/@algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha"></script>

Reviewer: In our docs [we recommend using jsDelivr](https://www.algolia.com/doc/api-client/getting-started/update-the-client/javascript/?client=javascript#other-cdns), <e may want to remove this unpkg mention then.

Author: Good reference. I changed it to look more like our IS recommendations. https://github.com/algolia/autocomplete.js/pull/415/commits/97d23b3c863210f2d251a98b1e5bebe2cf14fe1d

> <script src="https://unpkg.com/@algolia/autocomplete-js@alpha"></script>

Reviewer: In our docs [we recommend using jsDelivr](https://www.algolia.com/doc/api-client/getting-started/update-the-client/javascript/?client=javascript#other-cdns), we may want to remove this unpkg mention then. Besides, users might be tempted to copy both lines.

    return [
      {
        getItems({ query }) {
          return getAlgoliaHits({
            searchClient,
            queries: [{ indexName: "autocomplete", query }]
          });
        },
        templates: {
          item({ item }) {
            return item.content;
          }
        }
      }
    ];
  }
});
```

That creates a basic implementation. To make it more useful, you can use the [`getItemUrl`](/docs/sources#getitemurl) to add [keyboard accessibility](keyboard-navigation) features. It lets users open items directly from the autocomplete.

```js
import algoliasearch from 'algoliasearch/lite';
import { autocomplete, getAlgoliaHits } from "@algolia/autocomplete-js";

const searchClient = algoliasearch(
  'BH4D9OD16A',
  'a5c3ccfd361b8bcb9708e679c43ae0e5'
);

autocomplete({
  container: "#autocomplete",
  getSources({ query }) {
    return [
      {
        getItems({ query }) {
          return getAlgoliaHits({
            searchClient,
            queries: [{ indexName: "autocomplete", query }]
          })
        },
        templates: {
          item({ item }) {
            return item.content;
          }
        },
        getItemUrl({ item }) {

>             eturn item.url;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            return item.url;
```

        }
      }
    ];
  }
});
```

## Going further

> This outlines a very simple autocomplete implementation. There's a lot more you can do, like and [adding multiple sources](/docs/creating-multi-source-autocompletes), using [templates for headers, footers](/docs/templates#rendering-a-header-and-footer), or when there's [no results](/docs/templates#rendering-an-empty-state). To learn about customization options, read more about the [**Core Concepts**](/docs/basic-options) or follow one of the [**Guides**](/docs/using-query-suggestions-plugin).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This outlines a very simple autocomplete implementation. There's a lot more you can do, like [adding multiple sources](/docs/creating-multi-source-autocompletes), using [templates for headers, footers](/docs/templates#rendering-a-header-and-footer), or when there's [no results](/docs/templates#rendering-an-empty-state). To learn about customization options, read more about the [**Core Concepts**](/docs/basic-options) or follow one of the [**Guides**](/docs/using-query-suggestions-plugin).
```

autocomplete({
  container: '#autocomplete',
  placeholder: "Search the autocomplete documentation",
  openOnFocus: true,
  getSources() {
    return [/* ... */];
  },
});
```
The [`placeholder`](autocomplete-js#placeholder) option defines the placeholder text used until the user starts typing in the input. The [`openOnFocus`](autocomplete-js#openonfocus) option defines whether to open the panel on [focus](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/focus_event), when there's no query. It defaults to `false`, so you need to set it to `true` if you want the dropdown to appear as soon as a user clicks on it.

Autocomplete is now plugged in. But you won't see anything appear until you define your [sources](sources).

## Defining what items to display

[Sources](sources) define where to retrieve the items to display in your autocomplete dropdown. You define your sources in the [`getSources`](sources#getsources) function by returning an array of [source objects](sources#source). Each source object needs to include a [`getItems`](sources#getitems) property that returns the items to display. Sources can be a static array or be dynamic.

> This example uses the [Algolia index](https://www.algolia.com/doc/faq/basics/what-is-an-index/) that's [powering the documentation search](https://docsearch.algolia.com/) on this site as a source. The [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) library provides a built-in [`getAlgoliaHits`](getAlgoliaHits) function for just this purpose.

Author: Should we recommend using the `preset` now that `autocomplete-js` also includes `getAlgoliaHits` now?

> This example uses the [Algolia index](https://www.algolia.com/doc/faq/basics/what-is-an-index/) that's [powering the documentation search](https://docsearch.algolia.com/) on this site as a source. The [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) library provides a built-in [`getAlgoliaHits`](getAlgoliaHits) function for just this purpose.

Reviewer: @Meschreiber That's right, we should use the one exported by `autocomplete-js` because it sends the appropriate user agents (see #420).

> This example uses the [Algolia index](https://www.algolia.com/doc/faq/basics/what-is-an-index/) that's [powering the documentation search](https://docsearch.algolia.com/) on this site as a source. The [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) library provides a built-in [`getAlgoliaHits`](getAlgoliaHits) function for just this purpose.

Author: ```suggestion
This example uses the [Algolia index](https://www.algolia.com/doc/faq/basics/what-is-an-index/) [powering the documentation search](https://docsearch.algolia.com/) on this site as a source. The [`autocomplete-js`](autocomplete-js) package provides a built-in [`getAlgoliaHits`](getAlgoliaHits) function for just this purpose.
```

```js title="JavaScript"
import algoliasearch from 'algoliasearch/lite';
import { autocomplete, getAlgoliaHits } from "@algolia/autocomplete-js";

const searchClient = algoliasearch(
  'BH4D9OD16A',
  'a5c3ccfd361b8bcb9708e679c43ae0e5'
);

autocomplete({
  container: "#autocomplete",
  placeholder: "Search documentation",
  openOnFocus: true,
  getSources({ query }) {
    return [
      {
        getItems() {
          return getAlgoliaHits({
            searchClient,
            queries: [
              {
                indexName: "autocomplete",
                query,
                params: {
                  hitsPerPage: 10
                }
              }
            ]
          });
        },
      }
    ];
  }
});
```

> The `searchClient` requires an [Algolia application ID and API key](https://www.algolia.com/doc/guides/sending-and-managing-data/send-and-update-your-data/how-to/importing-with-the-api/#application-id). It lets you search into your Algolia index using an array of `queries`, which defines the queries you want to make to the index.

Reviewer 2: @Meschreiber I think this one fell through the cracks 🙂

This example makes just one query to the "autocomplete" index using the `query` from [`getSources`](sources#getsources). It passes one additional parameter, [`hitsPerPage`](https://www.algolia.com/doc/api-reference/api-parameters/hitsPerPage/) to define how many items to display, but you could pass any other [Algolia query parameters](https://www.algolia.com/doc/api-reference/api-parameters/).

Although you've now declared what items display using [`getSources`](sources#getsources), you still won't see anything until you've defined _how_ to display the items you've retrieved.

## Defining how to display items

[Sources](sources) also define how to display items in your Autocomplete using [`templates`](templates).  Templates can return a string or anything that's a valid Virtual DOM element. The example creates a [Preact](https://preactjs.com/) component called `AutocompleteItem` as the template for each item to display.

> ```js title="JavaScript"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```jsx title="JSX"
```

> /** @jsx h */
> import { autocomplete, getAlgoliaHits } from "@algolia/autocomplete-js";
> import algoliasearch from "algoliasearch";
> import { h } from "preact";
> 
> const searchClient = algoliasearch(
>   "BH4D9OD16A",
>   "a5c3ccfd361b8bcb9708e679c43ae0e5"
> );
> 
> function AutocompleteItem({ hit, breadcrumb }) {
>   return (
>     <a href={hit.url} className="aa-ItemLink">
>       <div className="aa-ItemContent">
>         <div className="aa-ItemTitle">{hit.hierarchy[hit.type]}</div>
>         <div className="aa-ItemContentSubtitle">{breadcrumb.join(" • ")}</div>
>       </div>
>     </a>
>   );
> }
> 
> autocomplete({
>   container: "#autocomplete",
>   placeholder: "Search documentation",
>   openOnFocus: true,
>   getSources({ query }) {
>     return [
>       {
>         getItems() {
>           return getAlgoliaHits({
>             searchClient,
>             queries: [
>               {
>                 indexName: "autocomplete",
>                 query,
>                 params: {
>                   hitsPerPage: 10
>                 }
>               }
>             ]
>           });
>         },
>         templates: {
>           item({ item }) {
>             return AutocompleteItem({
>               hit: item,
>               breadcrumb: Object.values(item.hierarchy)
>                 .filter(Boolean)
>                 .slice(0, -1)
>             });
>           }
>         }
>       }
>     ];
>   }
> });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
/** @jsx h */
import { autocomplete, getAlgoliaHits } from '@algolia/autocomplete-js';
import algoliasearch from 'algoliasearch';
import { h } from 'preact';

const searchClient = algoliasearch(
  'BH4D9OD16A',
  'a5c3ccfd361b8bcb9708e679c43ae0e5'
);

function AutocompleteItem({ hit, breadcrumb }) {
  return (
    <a href={hit.url} className="aa-ItemLink">
      <div className="aa-ItemContent">
        <div className="aa-ItemTitle">{hit.hierarchy[hit.type]}</div>
        <div className="aa-ItemContentSubtitle">{breadcrumb.join(' • ')}</div>
      </div>
    </a>
  );
}

autocomplete({
  container: '#autocomplete',
  placeholder: 'Search documentation',
  openOnFocus: true,
  getSources({ query }) {
    return [
      {
        getItems() {
          return getAlgoliaHits({
            searchClient,
            queries: [
              {
                indexName: 'autocomplete',
                query,
                params: {
                  hitsPerPage: 10,
                },
              },
            ],
          });
        },
        templates: {
          item({ item }) {
            return AutocompleteItem({
              hit: item,
              breadcrumb: Object.values(item.hierarchy)
                .filter(Boolean)
                .slice(0, -1),
            });
          },
        },
      },
    ];
  },
});
```

```

> The template displays the page or section name, found in the last level of the `item.hierachy`. Beneath that, the template displays a breadcrumb composed of the levels in `item.hierarchy`, except for the last level, which is the section name. The level where the section or page name is found is given in `item.type`. Deeper levels indicate more deeply nested sections on a page. For example, this is what the record for this section looks like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The template displays the section name from the deepest level of `item.hierachy`. Beneath that, it displays a breadcrumb from all the higher levels in `item.hierarchy`.

This is what the JSON record looks like:
```

```json title="JSON record"

> {
>   "hierarchy": {
>     "lvl0":"The Basics",
>     "lvl1":"Getting Started",
>     "lvl2":"Defining how to display items",
>     "lvl3":null,
>     "lvl4":null,
>     "lvl5":null,
>     "lvl6":null
>     },
>   "type":"lvl2",
>   "url":"https://autocomplete.algolia.com/docs/getting-started/"
> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{
  "hierarchy": {
    "lvl0": "The Basics",
    "lvl1": "Getting Started",
    "lvl2": "Defining how to display items",
    "lvl3": null,
    "lvl4": null,
    "lvl5": null,
    "lvl6": null
  },
  "type": "lvl2",
  "url": "https://autocomplete.algolia.com/docs/getting-started/"
}
```

```

Check out how the template displays items by searching in the input below:

<input placeholder="This is just a placeholder"></input>

> That creates a basic implementation. To make it more useful, you can use the [`getItemUrl`](sources#getitemurl) to add [keyboard accessibility](keyboard-navigation) features. It lets users open items directly from the autocomplete menu.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is all you need for a basic implementation. To go even further, you can use the [`getItemUrl`](sources#getitemurl) to add [keyboard accessibility](keyboard-navigation) features. It lets users open items directly from the autocomplete menu.
```

> ```js title="JavaScript"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```jsx title="JSX"
```

> /** @jsx h */
> import { autocomplete, getAlgoliaHits } from "@algolia/autocomplete-js";
> import algoliasearch from "algoliasearch";
> import { h } from "preact";
> 
> const searchClient = algoliasearch(
>   "BH4D9OD16A",
>   "a5c3ccfd361b8bcb9708e679c43ae0e5"
> );
> 
> function AutocompleteItem({ hit, breadcrumb }) {
>   return (/* ... */);
> }
> 
> autocomplete({
>   container: "#autocomplete",
>   placeholder: "Search documentation",
>   openOnFocus: true,
>   getSources({ query }) {
>     return [
>       {
>         getItems() {
>           /*...*/
>         },
>         templates: {
>           /*...*/
>         },
>         getItemUrl({ item }) {
>           return item.url;
>         }
>       }
>     ];
>   }
> });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
/** @jsx h */
import { autocomplete, getAlgoliaHits } from '@algolia/autocomplete-js';
import algoliasearch from 'algoliasearch';
import { h } from 'preact';

const searchClient = algoliasearch(
  'BH4D9OD16A',
  'a5c3ccfd361b8bcb9708e679c43ae0e5'
);

function AutocompleteItem({ hit, breadcrumb }) {
  // ...
}

autocomplete({
  container: '#autocomplete',
  placeholder: 'Search documentation',
  openOnFocus: true,
  getSources({ query }) {
    return [
      {
        getItems() {
          /*...*/
        },
        templates: {
          /*...*/
        },
        getItemUrl({ item }) {
          return item.url;
        },
      },
    ];
  },
});
```

```
Now give it a try:

<input placeholder="This is just another placeholder"></input>

## Going further

> This outlines a simple autocomplete implementation. There's a lot more you can do, like [adding multiple sources](creating-multi-source-autocompletes), using [templates for headers, footers](templates#rendering-a-header-and-footer), or when there's [no results](templates#rendering-an-empty-state). To learn about customization options, read the [**Core Concepts**](basic-options) or follow one of the [**Guides**](using-query-suggestions-plugin).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This outlines a basic autocomplete implementation. There's a lot more you can do, like [adding multiple sources](creating-multi-source-autocompletes), using [templates for headers, footers](templates#rendering-a-header-and-footer), or when there's [no results](templates#rendering-an-empty-state), or even add a [plugin](plugins). To learn about customization options, read the [**Core Concepts**](basic-options) or follow one of the [**Guides**](using-query-suggestions-plugin).
```
